[MM-21753] Document process for Community Plugins in the Marketplace (#524)
mattermost/mattermost-developer-documentation: site/content/extend/plugins/community-plugin-marketplace.md

### Requirements for adding community plugin to the Marketplace
Every community plugin must fulfill the following checklist to be added to the Marketplace:

**Product Requirements (Checked by a Product Manager)**

1. The plugin is published under an Apache v2 compatible license (e.g. no GPL, APGL). A list of compatible licenses can be found [here](https://apache.org/legal/resolved.html#category-a).
2. The source code is available in a public git repository.
3. There is a public issue or bug tracker for the plugin, which is linked in the plugin documentation and linked via `support_url` in the manifest.
4. The plugin provides detailed usage documentation with at least one screenshot of the plugin in action, list of features and a development guide. This is typically a README file or a landing page on the web. The link to the documentation is set as `homepage_url` in the manifest. A great example is the [README of the GitHub plugin](https://github.com/mattermost/mattermost-plugin-github/blob/master/README.md).
5. For every release a changelog has to be publish. The link to it is noted via `release_notes_url` in the manifest.

> 6. The plugin has to be out of Beta and be released with at least v1.0.0.

Reviewer: 5-7 is not 100% (yet) true for ourselves, why are we imposing it on the community plugins?

Reviewer: I saw the beta section at the bottom, maybe link there from here?

Author: > 5-7 is not 100% (yet) true for ourselves, why are we imposing it on the community plugins?

Mostly to keep increasing the quality of plugins in the Marketplace. Especially 7 is a huge pain point for admins.

Author: > I saw the beta section at the bottom, maybe link there from here?

Do you mean linking from the beta section to this requirement?

Reviewer: 7) is going to force devs to use the KV store and proprietary config methods more. 1/5 we should offer best practices of configuration management with a CLI interface, and JSON export/import (via CLI), and continue encouraging to use the config store (and eventually the admin console?) for seldom changing values.

I am ok with including it as a requirement, as long as we provide at least a somewhat specific future direction for what may be coming, even if a link to a "Needs Spec" ticket to contribute use-cases to.

Author: @marianunez recently implemented the possibility to have custom settings in the system console using js. See https://github.com/mattermost/mattermost-plugin-custom-attributes/pull/18 for an example usage. That seams to me a very good first step on helping plugin defining everything in the system console.

7. All configuration has to be possible using the UI of Mattermost.

> 8. The plugin id defined in the manifest must not collide with the id of an existing plugin in the marketplace.

Reviewer: should we at least recommend a naming convention here? Also this is totally OT, but have we considered using URLs as plugin IDs? A la go import path, embeddable as a path element itself?

Author: The documentation currently states:
> Reverse-DNS notation using a name you control is a good option, e.g. "com.mycompany.myplugin".

@levb and I talked about this offline and we agree that this convention should be used.

**Technical Requirements (Checked by a developers of the Toolkit or the Integrations team)**

> 1. The plugin works for 60k concurrent connections and in a high availability environment.

Reviewer: Do we have the tooling ready for this? If not, maybe add a note?

Author: There isn't tooling for this right now. What kind of note did you had in mind?

Reviewer: If I were a developer of a plugin, and saw this requirement I'd be asking the question, how do I know? Maybe re-iterate a simplified version of, "you submit to us, and we tell you?" 0/5

Author: :+1: Added a note in f97cbf7ceb1a1bde7953e13235e0d139792b0961

**Security Requirements (Checked by a member of the security team)**

1. The plugin does not expose a vulnerability.
2. The plugin does not include favor the author of the plugin or a third party excessively by e.g. including a bitcoin miner that mines on behalf of the author.
3. The plugins author must notify Mattermost about any vulnerabilities in the future.

**Functional Requirements (Checked by a and be avaiable  QA tester)**

1. The plugin works as expected with the latest version of Mattermost.
2. The plugin works as expected with the latest ESR version of Mattermost. This must not be checked if `min_server_version` is higher than the latest ESR version.

Given that plugins are currently in Beta and rapid development is still happening, breaking changes especially for the webapp can happen. It is expected from plugin authors to keep up with these changes and fix bugs that may occur. Breaking changes will be mentioned in the Important Upgrades Notes section (CAN WE LINK THERE?) of the [Mattermost Changelog](https://docs.mattermost.com/administration/changelog.html).

### Requirements for updating a community plugin to the Marketplace

> On every update of a community plugin must still fulfill the following checklist to be added to the Marketplace. This is checked by the four reviewers in the same way as when the plugin was added. The code review and security review should be performed against the `diff` of the last version in the Marketplace and the new version.

Reviewer: 👍 "the right thing to do"™

The release also has to follow [semver](https://semver.org/). This specifically means for plugins:

* If the plugin exposes an API for inter plugin communication, breaking changes to the API require a major version bump.
* If an update requires manual migration actions from the administrator, a major version bump is required.

This is checked in dev review.

The new release must not change the plugin id defined in the manifest as this would require a reconfiguration of the plugin by a system admin.

### Process for adding community plugin to the Marketplace
There will be an owner for community plugins, that will guide you through the review process. Currently this is [hanzei](https://github.com/hanzei).

1. You open an issue on [The Plugin Marketplace Repository](https://github.com/mattermost/mattermost-marketplace) using a pre defined template for new plugins. The template contains the checklist above, so you can check the items. Please also points out which commit should be used for the review. You may cut an release candidate (RC) and for it the reviews.

> 2. The reviews are requested by the owner. This is done by cloning [this](TODO) JIRA ticket for every reviewer, assigning it and mentioning the ticket on GitHub. The reviewers point out found issues on the bug tracker of the community plugin. Once all issues are resolved, they comment on the issue stating the positive review and mark the JIRA ticket as resolved.

Author: Todo: Add link to JIRA ticket once https://community-release.mattermost.com/core/pl/jhy8ih9igty4fyj97nxfoinaqw is resolved.

3. Once all items are checked and reviews made, the community repository is forked under the Mattermost GitHub organization as a private repository. This allows using the existing build tools for releasing new plugin versions. The fork is maintained by the owner.
4. `/mb cutPlugin --repo $REP --tag $TAG` is run to build, signs and uploads the approved commit of the plugin.
5. The owner opens a PR, which adds the plugin to `plugins.json` using `generator add $REP $TAG --community`. Only a functional review by one dev and one QA member is needed for this PR.
6. After the PR is merged, the plugin gets promoted across Mattermost social media and swag sent to the maintainer. If there are multiple maintainers, everyone gets swag.

### Process for updating community plugin to the Marketplace
The process is the same as for adding a community plugin besides a couple of differences:

> - [This](TODO) JIRA ticket is used instead

Author: Same here

---
title: Community Plugins in the Marketplace
subsection: Plugins (Beta)
weight: 60
---

> Once your plugin has reached a certain level of quality, you might consider submitting it to the Plugin Marketplace. The Plugin Marketplace allows discovery, installation and updates of plugins directly within Mattermost. It is a great way to get feedback on your plugin and help make it more popular. Once your plugin is accepted to the Marketplace, Mattermost will also send you swag!

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Once your plugin has reached a certain level of quality, you can consider submitting it to the Plugin Marketplace. The Plugin Marketplace is a platform that supports discovery, installation, and updates of plugins directly within Mattermost via the System Console. It's a great way to get feedback on your plugin and help make it more popular. Once your plugin is accepted to the Marketplace, Mattermost will also send you swag!
```

Question: 
- Do we have a definition of "certain level of quality"? It might be helpful to provide some guidelines around that. 
- I wonder if linking [to this page](https://docs.mattermost.com/administration/plugins.html) would help with some initial guidance around plugins? Or it might add a layer of complexity? I'm 3/5 mainly because it might help to give more info upfront.

Author: FYI: The Marketplace is not part of the Sytem Console and is instead a modal in the main window.

> Do we have a definition of "certain level of quality"? It might be helpful to provide some guidelines around that.

The list of requirements below defines the "certain level of quality" that is needed.

> I wonder if linking to this page would help with some initial guidance around plugins? Or it might add a layer of complexity? I'm 3/5 mainly because it might help to give more info upfront.

The page this PR adds is quite deep into the document. I don't expect non-dev to accidentally stubble across it. The page you linked is more for admins then it is for developers.

### Requirements for adding community plugin to the Marketplace
Every community plugin must fulfill the following checklist to be added to the Marketplace:

**Product Requirements (Checked by a Product Manager)**

1. The plugin is published under an Apache v2 compatible license (e.g. no GPL, APGL). A list of compatible licenses can be found [here](https://apache.org/legal/resolved.html#category-a).
2. The source code is available in a public git repository.
3. There is a public issue or bug tracker for the plugin, which is linked in the plugin documentation and linked via `support_url` in the manifest.

> 4. The plugin provides detailed usage documentation with at least one screenshot of the plugin in action, list of features and a development guide. This is typically a README file or a landing page on the web. The link to the documentation is set as `homepage_url` in the manifest. A great example is the [README of the GitHub plugin](https://github.com/mattermost/mattermost-plugin-github/blob/master/README.md).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
4. The plugin provides detailed usage documentation with at least one screenshot of the plugin in action, list of features, and a development guide. This is typically a ``README`` file or a landing page on the web. The link to the documentation is set as `homepage_url` in the manifest. A great example is the [``README`` of the GitHub plugin](https://github.com/mattermost/mattermost-plugin-github/blob/master/README.md).
```

5. For the current release and upcoming ones a changelog has to be published, with a link recorded in the `release_notes_url` property of the `plugin.json` manifest.
6. The plugin has to be out of Beta and be released with at least v1.0.0.
7. All configuration is accessible via the UI of Mattermost.

> 8. The plugin id defined in the manifest must not collide with the id of an existing plugin in the marketplace. It should follow [the documentation's suggested naming convention](https://developers.mattermost.com/extend/plugins/manifest-reference/#id).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
8. The plugin ID defined in the manifest must not collide with the ID of an existing plugin in the Marketplace. It should follow [the documentation's suggested naming convention](https://developers.mattermost.com/extend/plugins/manifest-reference/#id).
```

**Technical Requirements (Checked by developers of the Toolkit or the Integrations team)**

1. The plugin works for 60k concurrent connections and in a high-availability deployment. **Note:** There are currently no publicly-available tools to verify these properties. As such, they are checked during code review by a developer.

> 2. The plugin logs important events on appropriate log levels to allow system admins to troubleshoot issues.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
2. The plugin logs important events on appropriate log levels to allow System Admins to troubleshoot issues.
```

> **Security Requirements (Checked by a member of the security team)**

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
**Security Requirements (Checked by a member of the Security team)**
```

1. Security reviews do not reveal any exploitable vulnerabilities in the plugin.

> 2. The plugin provided an email address or a username on the [Community Server](https://community.mattermost.com) used to report vulnerabilities in the future.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
2. The plugin provides an email address or a username on the [Community Server](https://community.mattermost.com) used to report vulnerabilities in the future.
```

**Functional Requirements (Checked by a QA tester)**

1. The plugin must set a `min_server_version` in the manifest.

> 2. The plugin must work on all Mattermost versions greater or equal then `min_server_version`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
2. The plugin must work on all Mattermost versions greater than or equal to the `min_server_version`.
```

> Please note that Mattermost reserves the right to reject any plugin submission from the marketplace.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Please note that Mattermost reserves the right to reject any plugin submission from the Marketplace.
```

> Given that plugin framework is currently in Beta and rapid development is still happening, breaking changes especially for the webapp can happen. It is expected from plugin authors to keep up with these changes and fix bugs that may occur. Breaking changes will be mentioned in the "Important Upgrades Notes" section of the [Mattermost Changelog](https://docs.mattermost.com/administration/changelog.html).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As the plugin framework is currently in Beta, the rapid development cycle means that breaking changes (especially for the web app) can be expected. It's recommended that plugin authors keep up with these changes and fix bugs that may occur. Breaking changes will be mentioned in the "Important Upgrades Notes" section of the [Mattermost Changelog](https://docs.mattermost.com/administration/changelog.html).
```

> ### Requirements for updating a Community Plugin to the Marketplace

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Requirements for updating a Community Plugin to the Marketplace
```
Space between this and the following paragraph.

> When a community plugin is updated, it must still fulfill the following checklist to be added to the Marketplace. This is checked by the four reviewers in the same way as when the plugin was added. The code review and security review should be performed against the `diff` of the last version in the Marketplace and the new version to be updated in the Marketplace.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When a community plugin is updated, it must fulfill the following checklist to remain on the Marketplace. This is checked by the four reviewers in the same way as when the plugin was added. The code review and security review should be performed against the `diff` of the last version in the Marketplace and the new version to be updated in the Marketplace.
```

Author: @justinegeffen Both you suggestion and my test don't quite hit what I'm trying to say:

When a plugin is updated, the **new** version must fulfill the following checklist to be included in the Marketplace. The current version has already been checked and therefore doesn't have to be re checked.

Suggestions how to say this?

Reviewer 2: Ah I see. I think that works well actually, so I've updated my suggestion.

> The release also has to follow [Semantic Versioning](https://semver.org/). This specifically means for plugins:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The release also has to follow [Semantic Versioning](https://semver.org/). For plugins this means:
```

* If the plugin exposes a public API, breaking changes to the API require a major version bump.
* If an update requires manual migration actions from the administrator, a major version bump is required.

This is checked in dev review.

> The new release must not change the plugin id defined in the manifest as this would require a reconfiguration of the plugin by a system admin.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The new release must not change the plugin ID defined in the manifest as this would require a reconfiguration of the plugin by a System Admin.
```

> ### Process for adding Community Plugin to the Marketplace

Reviewer 2: Add a line break between this and the following paragraph.

All community plugins are assigned an _owner_ to guide you through the review process. Connect with [hanzei](https://github.com/hanzei) for more details. Ask non-confidential questions in the [Marketplace channel](https://community.mattermost.com/core/channels/plugins-marketplace).

> 1. Open an issue on the Plugin Marketplace Repository using [a pre-defined template for new plugins](https://github.com/mattermost/mattermost-marketplace/issues/new?template=add_plugin.md). The template contains the checklist above, so you can check the items. Please also point out which commit should be used for the review. You may cut a release candidate (RC) for the reviews.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. Open an issue on the Plugin Marketplace repository using [a pre-defined template for new plugins](https://github.com/mattermost/mattermost-marketplace/issues/new?template=add_plugin.md). The template contains the checklist above, so you can check the items. Please also point out which commit should be used for the review. You may cut a release candidate (RC) for the reviews.
```

> 2. The _owner_ forks the community repository under the Mattermost GitHub organization as a private fork. This allows using the existing build tools for releasing new plugin versions. The fork is maintained by the _owner_. Naming conflicts are resolved by appending your username to the repository name e.g. `jira-someusername`. The community members is given read access to the private fork.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
2. The _owner_ forks the community repository under the Mattermost GitHub organization as a private fork so the existing build tools for releasing new plugin versions can be used. The fork is maintained by the _owner_. Naming conflicts are resolved by appending your username to the repository name e.g. `jira-someusername`. The community member is given read access to the private fork.
```

3. The _owner_ submits a pull request to merge the latest version of the community plugin into `master`. Reviews are requested by the _owner_. The reviewers point out general discovered issues in the pull request or on the bug tracker of the community plugin. Once all blocking issues are resolved, they approve the pull request.

> 4. The pull request gets merged and`/mb cutplugin --repo $REP --tag $TAG` is run to build, sign and upload the approved commit of the plugin.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
4. The pull request gets merged and`/mb cutplugin --repo $REP --tag $TAG` is run to build, sign, and upload the approved commit of the plugin.
```

> 5. The _owner_ opens a PR, which adds the plugin to `plugins.json` using `generator add $REP $TAG --community`. Only a functional review by one dev and one QA member is needed for this PR.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
5. The _owner_ opens a pull request, which adds the plugin to `plugins.json` using `generator add $REP $TAG --community`. Only a functional review by one dev and one QA member is needed for this pull request.
```

> 6. After the PR is merged, the plugin gets promoted across Mattermost social media and swag sent to the maintainer. If there are multiple maintainers, everyone gets swag.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
6. After the pull request is merged, the plugin gets promoted across Mattermost social media and swag is sent to the maintainer. If there are multiple maintainers, everyone gets swag.
```

> ### Process for updating Community Plugin to the Marketplace

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Process for Updating Community Plugin to the Marketplace
```
Add linebreak between this and following paragraph.

1. Open an issue on the Plugin Marketplace Repository using [a pre-defined template for new plugins](https://github.com/mattermost/mattermost-marketplace/issues/new?template=update_plugin.md). The template contains the checklist above, so you can check the items. Please also point out which commit should be used for the review. You may cut a release candidate (RC) for the reviews.
2. The  _owner_ submits a pull request to merge the upstream changes. Reviews are requested by the _owner_. The reviewers point out general discovered issues in the pull request or on the bug tracker of the community plugin. After all blocking issues are resolved, they approve the pull request.

> 3. The pull request gets merged and `/mb cutplugin --repo $REP --tag $TAG` is run to build, sign and upload the approved commit of the plugin.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
3. The pull request gets merged and `/mb cutplugin --repo $REP --tag $TAG` is run to build, sign, and upload the approved commit of the plugin.
```

> 4. The _owner_ opens a PR, which adds the plugin to `plugins.json` using `generator add $REP $TAG --community`. Only a functional review by one dev and one QA member is needed for this PR.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
4. The _owner_ opens a pull request, which adds the plugin to `plugins.json` using `generator add $REP $TAG --community`. Only a functional review by one dev and one QA member is needed for this pull request.
```

5. Promotion via social media might happen on outstanding updates.

### Beta Plugins

> If a community plugin doesn’t make it through the review process, it may still be added to the Marketplace and marked as “Beta” via a label. The reviewers make a case by case decision if the quality of a plugin is sophisticated enough to be added to the Marketplace. Security and functional reviews and Items 1, 2, 3 and 5 from the [Product Requirements Checklist](#requirements-for-adding-community-plugin-to-the-marketplace) must be fulfilled for beta plugins.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If a community plugin doesn’t make it through the review process, it may still be added to the Marketplace and marked as “Beta”. The reviewers decide whether the quality of a plugin is sophisticated enough to be added to the Marketplace on a case-by-case basis. Security and functional reviews and items 1, 2, 3, and 5 from the [Product Requirements Checklist](#requirements-for-adding-community-plugin-to-the-marketplace) must be fulfilled for Beta plugins.
```

> It must be made clear in the Marketplace UI that a plugin is in beta. Beta plugins must only be visible on Mattermost servers that support labels (i.e. Mattermost v5.20 or later).

Reviewer 2: ### 
```suggestion
It must be made clear in the Marketplace UI that a plugin is in Beta. Beta plugins must only be visible on Mattermost servers that support labels (i.e. Mattermost v5.20 or later).
```

### Security Issues

> Any security issues found in the plugin should be reported by email to `responsibledisclosure@mattermost.com` or sent directly to a member of the [security team](https://developers.mattermost.com/internal/rd-teams/#security-team) on the [Community Server](https://community.mattermost.com/).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Any security issues found in the plugin should be reported by email to `responsibledisclosure@mattermost.com` or sent directly to a member of the [Security team](https://developers.mattermost.com/internal/rd-teams/#security-team) on the [Community Server](https://community.mattermost.com/).
```

---
title: Community Plugins in the Marketplace
subsection: Plugins (Beta)
weight: 60
---

> Once your plugins has reached a certain level of quality, you might consider submitting it to the Plugin Marketplace. The Plugin Marketplace allows discovery, installation and updates of plugins directly within Mattermost. It is a great way to get feedback on your plugin and help making it more popular. Once your plugin is accepted to the Marketplace, Mattermost will also send you swag!

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Once your plugins has reached a certain level of quality, you might consider submitting it to the Plugin Marketplace. The Plugin Marketplace allows discovery, installation and updates of plugins directly within Mattermost. It is a great way to get feedback on your plugin and help make it more popular. Once your plugin is accepted to the Marketplace, Mattermost will also send you swag!
```

### Requirements for adding community plugin to the Marketplace
Every community plugin must fulfill the following checklist to be added to the Marketplace:

**Product Requirements (Checked by a Product Manager)**

1. The plugin is published under an Apache v2 compatible license (e.g. no GPL, APGL). A list of compatible licenses can be found [here](https://apache.org/legal/resolved.html#category-a).
2. The source code is available in a public git repository.
3. There is a public issue or bug tracker for the plugin, which is linked in the plugin documentation and linked via `support_url` in the manifest.
4. The plugin provides detailed usage documentation with at least one screenshot of the plugin in action, list of features and a development guide. This is typically a README file or a landing page on the web. The link to the documentation is set as `homepage_url` in the manifest. A great example is the [README of the GitHub plugin](https://github.com/mattermost/mattermost-plugin-github/blob/master/README.md).

> 5. For every release a changelog has to be publish. The link to it is noted via `release_notes_url` in the manifest.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
5. For every release a changelog has to be published, with a link recorded in the `release_notes_url` property of the `plugin.json` manifest.
```

6. The plugin has to be out of Beta and be released with at least v1.0.0.
7. All configuration has to be possible using the UI of Mattermost.
8. The plugin id defined in the manifest must not collide with the id of an existing plugin in the marketplace. It should follow [the naming convention](https://developers.mattermost.com/extend/plugins/manifest-reference/#id).

**Technical Requirements (Checked by a developers of the Toolkit or the Integrations team)**

1. The plugin works for 60k concurrent connections and in a high availability environment. (There are currently no tools available to verify this property. Hence, it is checked via code review by a developer)
2. The plugin logs important events on appropriate log levels to allow system admins to troubleshoot issues.

**Security Requirements (Checked by a member of the security team)**

1. The plugin does not expose a vulnerability.

> 2. The plugin does not include favor the author of the plugin or a third party excessively by e.g. including a bitcoin miner that mines on behalf of the author.

Reviewer 3: This seems like an oddly written security requirement. I'd much just have a generic section that says, "Mattermost reserves the right to reject any plugin submission from the marketplace."

> 3. The plugins author must notify Mattermost about any vulnerabilities in the future.

Reviewer 3: nit: this is a future requirement, not one that can be checked before adding to the marketplace. Do we want to set communication expectations here instead? (i.e. you must register an email address for communication with the security team)

> **Functional Requirements (Checked by a and be avaiable  QA tester)**

Reviewer 3: Can't parse the part in parentheses here -- can you clarify?

Author: Fixes :+1:

1. The plugin works as expected with the latest version of Mattermost.

> 2. The plugin works as expected with the latest ESR version of Mattermost. This must not be checked if `min_server_version` is higher than the latest ESR version.

Reviewer 3: Should we collapse these two and instead require that `min_server_version` be defined, and that it works for all corresponding versions? (We will qualify the latest and ESR as appropriate.)

Author: I'm not sure that this would make it it shorter. To me the current wording is quite clear 1/5

Reviewer 3: So the specific sentence I'm stumbling over is:
> This must not be checked if `min_server_version` is higher than the latest ESR version.

I'm interpreting this to mean `if min_server_version > esr; continue`, but the "must not be checked" part reads awkwardly. Stepping back and imagining myself as a plugin author, Mattermost wants two things:
* Specify an appropriate `min_server_version` in my `plugin.json`
* Plugin works as expected on all supported Mattermost versions >= `min_server_version`. IMO, the ESR is an internal detail to our process, not to the plugin author.

Author: Makes sense :+1:

> Given that plugins are currently in Beta and rapid development is still happening, breaking changes especially for the webapp can happen. It is expected from plugin authors to keep up with these changes and fix bugs that may occur. Breaking changes will be mentioned in the "Important Upgrades Notes" section of the [Mattermost Changelog](https://docs.mattermost.com/administration/changelog.html).

Author: Sending an email newsletter seams quite heavy. Maybe we just entourage people to join the ~toolkit channel?

> Given that plugins are currently in Beta and rapid development is still happening, breaking changes especially for the webapp can happen. It is expected from plugin authors to keep up with these changes and fix bugs that may occur. Breaking changes will be mentioned in the "Important Upgrades Notes" section of the [Mattermost Changelog](https://docs.mattermost.com/administration/changelog.html).

Reviewer 3: I agree that coordinating in Mattermost seems optimal for the immediate volume of contributors as such. Perhaps this might change in the future.

### Requirements for updating a community plugin to the Marketplace

> On every update of a community plugin must still fulfill the following checklist to be added to the Marketplace. This is checked by the four reviewers in the same way as when the plugin was added. The code review and security review should be performed against the `diff` of the last version in the Marketplace and the new version.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
When a community plugin is updated, it must still fulfill the following checklist to be added to the Marketplace. This is checked by the four reviewers in the same way as when the plugin was added. The code review and security review should be performed against the `diff` of the last version in the Marketplace and the new version.
```

The release also has to follow [semver](https://semver.org/). This specifically means for plugins:

* If the plugin exposes an API for inter plugin communication, breaking changes to the API require a major version bump.
* If an update requires manual migration actions from the administrator, a major version bump is required.

This is checked in dev review.

The new release must not change the plugin id defined in the manifest as this would require a reconfiguration of the plugin by a system admin.

### Process for adding community plugin to the Marketplace

> There will be an owner for community plugins, that will guide you through the review process. Currently this is [hanzei](https://github.com/hanzei).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
All community plugins are assigned an owner to guide you through the review process. Connect with [hanzei](https://github.com/hanzei) for more details.
```

Also, should we link to your community handle instead?

Author: Given that the process takes place on GitHub I'm fine with having my GitHub username here.

> 1. You open an issue on [The Plugin Marketplace Repository](https://github.com/hanzei/plugin-test/issues/new/choose) using a pre defined template for new plugins. The template contains the checklist above, so you can check the items. Please also points out which commit should be used for the review. You may cut an release candidate (RC) and for it the reviews.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
1. You open an issue on [The Plugin Marketplace Repository](https://github.com/hanzei/plugin-test/issues/new/choose) using a pre-defined template for new plugins. The template contains the checklist above, so you can check the items. Please also points out which commit should be used for the review. You may cut a release candidate (RC) and for it the reviews.
```

> 1. You open an issue on [The Plugin Marketplace Repository](https://github.com/hanzei/plugin-test/issues/new/choose) using a pre defined template for new plugins. The template contains the checklist above, so you can check the items. Please also points out which commit should be used for the review. You may cut an release candidate (RC) and for it the reviews.

Reviewer 4: Are we going to pre-populate the reviewers with names for PM, Dev, Sec, QA?  Number 2. seems appropriate, but the author won't know who to add and will get immediately hung up on this step (creating Jira tickets)

> 1. You open an issue on [The Plugin Marketplace Repository](https://github.com/hanzei/plugin-test/issues/new/choose) using a pre defined template for new plugins. The template contains the checklist above, so you can check the items. Please also points out which commit should be used for the review. You may cut an release candidate (RC) and for it the reviews.

Author: That seams like a great improvement for the future. In a first iteration I would just use the pain templates. For now, I'm the only one using them, so I think it's fine.

2. The reviews are requested by the owner. This is done by cloning the following JIRA ticket for every reviewer, assigning it and mentioning the ticket on GitHub. The reviewers point out found issues on the bug tracker of the community plugin. Once all issues are resolved, they comment on the issue stating the positive review and mark the JIRA ticket as resolved.

>     - [PM](https://mattermost.atlassian.net/browse/MM-22224)

Reviewer 3: Is it possible to deep-link to the cloning page?

Author: Maybe. But the whole "JIRA cloning thing" is likely going to change soon. There is discussion about not using JIRA or using another kind of tickets. 

For now it's fine to use JIRA, but I don't want to spend time to fine tune a solution that might not be for long.

    - [Dev](https://mattermost.atlassian.net/browse/MM-22221)
    - [Security](https://mattermost.atlassian.net/browse/MM-22225)
    - [QA](https://mattermost.atlassian.net/browse/MM-22223)

> 3. Once all items are checked and reviews made, the community repository is forked under the Mattermost GitHub organization as a private repository. This allows using the existing build tools for releasing new plugin versions. The fork is maintained by the owner.

Reviewer 3: If the owner is non a core contributor, how do they maintain the private fork? Should this fork occur before the review is done instead?

Author: I didn't counted for a case where the owner is not a core contributor. 

To be clear: This is referring to the owner in https://github.com/mattermost/mattermost-developer-documentation/pull/524/files/0f1aa012672b64c31e5d15a2ee74c655085b9ba7#diff-ee526eb501deade82cd69d56e8654e3aR54. In most cases I expect myself to be the owner.

Reviewer 3: Ah, that makes sense. I didn't interpret `owner` earlier in the document as a "defined term", but just something used in passing, so the context here wasn't clear. But going further, I'm not convinced that an `owner` even in this context is permanent -- we should be assigning an owner each time the plugin is updated or if Mattermost takes some action.

I think it's important to distinguish the audiences here -- the plugin authors won't see these internal details, and might interpret them as actions they have to take. Anything we can do to disambiguate would be excellent!

Author: Thanks for the feedback. I agree that a owner doesn't have to be permanent. 

I've updated the document to make more clear that owner is a defined term by writing it in italic. I hope this term makes it clear, that these are actions taken by Mattermost and not the community member.

> 4. `/mb cutPlugin --repo $REP --tag $TAG` is run to build, signs and uploads the approved commit of the plugin.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
4. `/mb cutPlugin --repo $REP --tag $TAG` is run to build, sign and uploads the approved commit of the plugin.
```

5. The owner opens a PR, which adds the plugin to `plugins.json` using `generator add $REP $TAG --community`. Only a functional review by one dev and one QA member is needed for this PR.
6. After the PR is merged, the plugin gets promoted across Mattermost social media and swag sent to the maintainer. If there are multiple maintainers, everyone gets swag.

### Process for updating community plugin to the Marketplace

> The process is the same as for adding a community plugin besides a couple of differences:

Reviewer 3: I wonder if we should just be explicit here and list out the steps, inlining the differences, to avoid any confusion?

> The process is the same as for adding a community plugin besides a couple of differences:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The process is the same as adding a community plugin with a couple of differences:
```

- The following JIRA ticket is used instead
    - [PM](https://mattermost.atlassian.net/browse/MM-22228)
    - [Dev](https://mattermost.atlassian.net/browse/MM-22222)
    - [Security](https://mattermost.atlassian.net/browse/MM-22226)
    - [QA](https://mattermost.atlassian.net/browse/MM-22227)
- Swag is not sent again
- Promotion via social media happens only on outstanding updates.
- The master branch of the fork synced with the upstream community repository by running:

```sh
git fetch upstream
git checkout master
git --ff-only upstream/master
```

### Beta plugins

> If a community plugin doesn’t not make it through the review process, it may still be added to the Marketplace and market as “Beta” via a label. The reviewers make a case by case decision if the quality of a plugin is sophisticated enough to be added to the Marketplace. Security and functional review and Item 1, 2, 3 and 5 from the [Product Requirements Checklist](#requirements-for-adding-community-plugin-to-the-marketplace) must be fulfilled for beta plugin.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
If a community plugin doesn’t make it through the review process, it may still be added to the Marketplace and marked as “Beta” via a label. The reviewers make a case by case decision if the quality of a plugin is sophisticated enough to be added to the Marketplace. Security and functional reviews and Items 1, 2, 3 and 5 from the [Product Requirements Checklist](#requirements-for-adding-community-plugin-to-the-marketplace) must be fulfilled for beta plugins.
```

> Given that it must be made clear in the Marketplace UI that a plugin is in beta, all beta plugins must only be visible on Mattermost Servers that support labels, which is Mattermost v5.20.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
It must be made clear in the Marketplace UI that a plugin is in beta. All beta plugins must only be visible on Mattermost Servers that support labels, which is Mattermost v5.20.
```

### Take down Policy

> If a S2 and above security issue or bug that prevents the usage of the plugin for many users is not fixed within 14 days, the plugin gets taken from the Marketplace. It may be resubmitted, once the issue is resolved. Mattermost reserved the right to take down plugins at any time if a fix for a security issue is not forthcoming or the issue is critical enough to justify an immediate takedown.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
If an S2 and above security issue or bug that prevents the usage of the plugin for many users is not fixed within 14 days, the plugin gets taken from the Marketplace. It may be resubmitted, once the issue is resolved. Mattermost reserves the right to take down plugins at any time if a fix for a security issue is not forthcoming or the issue is critical enough to justify an immediate takedown.
```

---
title: Community Plugins in the Marketplace
subsection: Plugins (Beta)
weight: 60
---

Once your plugin has reached a certain level of quality, you might consider submitting it to the Plugin Marketplace. The Plugin Marketplace allows discovery, installation and updates of plugins directly within Mattermost. It is a great way to get feedback on your plugin and help make it more popular. Once your plugin is accepted to the Marketplace, Mattermost will also send you swag!

### Requirements for adding community plugin to the Marketplace
Every community plugin must fulfill the following checklist to be added to the Marketplace:

**Product Requirements (Checked by a Product Manager)**

1. The plugin is published under an Apache v2 compatible license (e.g. no GPL, APGL). A list of compatible licenses can be found [here](https://apache.org/legal/resolved.html#category-a).
2. The source code is available in a public git repository.
3. There is a public issue or bug tracker for the plugin, which is linked in the plugin documentation and linked via `support_url` in the manifest.

> 4. The plugin provides detailed usage documentation with at least one screenshot of the plugin in action, list of features and a development guide. This is typically a README file or a landing page on the web. The link to the documentation is set as `homepage_url` in the manifest. A great example is the [README of the GitHub plugin](https://github.com/mattermost/mattermost-plugin-github/blob/master/README.md).

Reviewer 5: This would cleaner as:
```markdown
A great example is the [the GitHub plugin's README](https://github.com/mattermost/mattermost-plugin-github/blob/master/README.md).
```
or:
```markdown
[The GitHub plugin's README](https://github.com/mattermost/mattermost-plugin-github/blob/master/README.md) is a great example.
```

Author: I'm not a native speaker. Could you please explain what the reasoning is behind using `the GitHub plugin's README` over `README of the GitHub plugin`?

Reviewer 5: It’s fairly minor and likely a matter of opinion, but I think that it reads more cleanly. Saying `the GitHub plugin’s README` keeps it as a singular concept: the README that is part of the GitHub plugin. Saying `the README of the GitHub plugin` is slightly more verbose and also requires the reader to associate two distinct concepts: some README and the GitHub plugin. In this case, that’s fairly simple and automatic, but it can be more complicated depending on the rest of the sentence.

> 5. For every release a changelog has to be published, with a link recorded in the `release_notes_url` property of the `plugin.json` manifest.

Reviewer 5: It would be cleaner to say "the plugin manifest" here.

Separately, how should a developer handle the scenario where there are a number of previous releases that do not have changelog entries?

Author: Good catch. There only has to be a changelog for new releases. Made this more clear :+1:

6. The plugin has to be out of Beta and be released with at least v1.0.0.
7. All configuration is accessible via the UI of Mattermost.

> 8. The plugin id defined in the manifest must not collide with the id of an existing plugin in the marketplace. It should follow [the naming convention](https://developers.mattermost.com/extend/plugins/manifest-reference/#id).

Reviewer 5: I might suggest "the documentation's suggested naming convention" here, to make it clearer which naming convention is being referred to from the text alone.

**Technical Requirements (Checked by developers of the Toolkit or the Integrations team)**

> 1. The plugin works for 60k concurrent connections and in a high availability environment. (There are currently no tools available to verify this property. Hence, it is checked via code review by a developer)

Reviewer 5: I'd suggest rewording this slightly:
```markdown
1. The plugin works for 60k concurrent connections and in a high-availability deployment. **Note:** There are currently no publicly-available tools to verify these properties. As such, they are checked during code review by a developer.
```

2. The plugin logs important events on appropriate log levels to allow system admins to troubleshoot issues.

**Security Requirements (Checked by a member of the security team)**

> 1. The plugin does not expose a vulnerability.

Reviewer 6: Nit: we can't really make sure a "does not expose a vulnerability". It's like saying "the plugin can't contain any bugs". Suggested wording: "Security reviews do not reveal any exploitable vulnerabilities in the plugin."

> 2. The plugins provided an email address or a username on the [Community Server](https://community.mattermost) used to report vulnerabilities in the future.

Reviewer 5: This link should probably go to `https://community.mattermost.com`. Also, the beginning should probably read "The plugin provides".

Author: Good suggestion :+1:

**Functional Requirements (Checked by a QA tester)**

1. The plugin must set a `min_server_version` in the manifest.
2. The plugin must work on all Mattermost versions greater or equal then `min_server_version`.

> Please note, that Mattermost reserves the right to reject any plugin submission from the marketplace.

Reviewer 5: The comma is unnecessary here.

> Given that plugins are currently in Beta and rapid development is still happening, breaking changes especially for the webapp can happen. It is expected from plugin authors to keep up with these changes and fix bugs that may occur. Breaking changes will be mentioned in the "Important Upgrades Notes" section of the [Mattermost Changelog](https://docs.mattermost.com/administration/changelog.html).

Reviewer 5: To avoid confusing Mattermost plugin functionality with the plugins themselves, I would recommend rewording the beginning of this to:
> Given that plugin support is currently in Beta[...]

### Requirements for updating a community plugin to the Marketplace

> When a community plugin is updated, it must still fulfill the following checklist to be added to the Marketplace. This is checked by the four reviewers in the same way as when the plugin was added. The code review and security review should be performed against the `diff` of the last version in the Marketplace and the new version.

Reviewer 5: Since the community plugin is already in the Marketplace, I would recommend ending the first sentence with:
>[...] to be updated in the Marketplace.

> The release also has to follow [semver](https://semver.org/). This specifically means for plugins:

Reviewer 5: "semver" should probably be spelled out as "semantic versioning".

> * If the plugin exposes an API for inter plugin communication, breaking changes to the API require a major version bump.

Reviewer 5: There should be a hyphen between the words in "inter-plugin communication", but also it's not super clear what is meant by that. Does this refer to an API for multiple instance of a plugin to communicate with each other? Alternatively, does it refer to an API exposed for use by external clients? Does that include API endpoints intended for use by the plugin's extensions to the webapp? If all of these meanings are intended, I might simplify this to something along the lines of:
> If the plugin exposes an API, breaking changes to that API require a major version bump.

Author: Thanks for the feedback. :+1: I went with the wording from https://semver.org/:
> If the plugin exposes a public API, breaking changes to the API require a major version bump.

* If an update requires manual migration actions from the administrator, a major version bump is required.

This is checked in dev review.

The new release must not change the plugin id defined in the manifest as this would require a reconfiguration of the plugin by a system admin.

### Process for adding community plugin to the Marketplace

> All community plugins are assigned an _owner_ to guide you through the review process. Connect with [hanzei](https://github.com/hanzei) for more details.

Reviewer 7: Can we have a back up in case you are on vacation? Can this be managed by a channel on the community server?

Author: Good suggestion. :+1: Added a link to https://community.mattermost.com/core/channels/plugins-marketplace

1. Open an issue on the Plugin Marketplace Repository using [a pre-defined template for new plugins](https://github.com/mattermost/mattermost-marketplace/issues/new?template=add_plugin.md). The template contains the checklist above, so you can check the items. Please also point out which commit should be used for the review. You may cut a release candidate (RC) for the reviews.
2. The reviews are requested by the _owner_. This is done by cloning the following JIRA ticket for every reviewer, assigning it and mentioning the ticket on GitHub. The reviewers point out discovered issues on the bug tracker of the community plugin. Once all issues are resolved, they comment on the issue stating the positive review and mark the JIRA ticket as resolved.
    - [PM](https://mattermost.atlassian.net/browse/MM-22224)
    - [Dev](https://mattermost.atlassian.net/browse/MM-22221)
    - [Security](https://mattermost.atlassian.net/browse/MM-22225)
    - [QA](https://mattermost.atlassian.net/browse/MM-22223)

> 3. Once all items are checked and reviews made, the community repository is forked under the Mattermost GitHub organization as a private repository. This allows using the existing build tools for releasing new plugin versions. The fork is maintained by the _owner_. Naming conflicts are resolved by appending your username to the repository name e.g. `jira-someusername`.

Reviewer 6: Forking should happen *before* reviews to make sure nothing changes between fork and release.

4. `/mb cutPlugin --repo $REP --tag $TAG` is run to build, sign and upload the approved commit of the plugin.
5. The _owner_ opens a PR, which adds the plugin to `plugins.json` using `generator add $REP $TAG --community`. Only a functional review by one dev and one QA member is needed for this PR.
6. After the PR is merged, the plugin gets promoted across Mattermost social media and swag sent to the maintainer. If there are multiple maintainers, everyone gets swag.

> ### Process for updating community plugin to the Marketplace

Reviewer 6: Do security updates follow the same process?

Reviewer: We should perhaps assure a more prompt response. Ideas/best practices?

Reviewer 6: Could we have the author email us at `responsibledisclosure@` instead of creating a Jira ticket? That would both let us know it's urgent and allow for them to describe the issue privately. Or we could set up a separate channel just for that. @DSchalla thoughts?

Author: Added a note that issues have to be send to `responsibledisclosure@`.

    - [Security](https://mattermost.atlassian.net/browse/MM-22226)
    - [QA](https://mattermost.atlassian.net/browse/MM-22227)
3. Once all items are checked and reviews made, the fork under the Mattermost GitHub organization is updated to the commit used for review.
```sh
git fetch upstream
git checkout master
git merge --ff-only $COMMIT_HASH
```
4. `/mb cutplugin --repo $REP --tag $TAG` is run to build, sign and upload the approved commit of the plugin.
5. The _owner_ opens a PR, which adds the plugin to `plugins.json` using `generator add $REP $TAG --community`. Only a functional review by one dev and one QA member is needed for this PR.
6. Promotion via social media might happen on outstanding updates.

### Beta plugins
If a community plugin doesn’t make it through the review process, it may still be added to the Marketplace and marked as “Beta” via a label. The reviewers make a case by case decision if the quality of a plugin is sophisticated enough to be added to the Marketplace. Security and functional reviews and Items 1, 2, 3 and 5 from the [Product Requirements Checklist](#requirements-for-adding-community-plugin-to-the-marketplace) must be fulfilled for beta plugins.

> It must be made clear in the Marketplace UI that a plugin is in beta. All beta plugins must only be visible on Mattermost Servers that support labels, which is Mattermost v5.20.

Reviewer 5: I would reword the final sentence here somewhat:
> Beta plugins must only be visible on Mattermost servers that support labels (i.e. Mattermost v5.20 or later).

### Take down Policy

> If an S2 and above security issue or bug that prevents the usage of the plugin for many users is not fixed within 14 days, the plugin gets taken from the Marketplace. It may be resubmitted, once the issue is resolved. Mattermost reserves the right to take down plugins at any time if a fix for a security issue is not forthcoming or the issue is critical enough to justify an immediate takedown.

Reviewer 5: What is an S2?

Also, some minor phrasing change suggestions:
> [...] the plugin will be removed from the Marketplace. It may be resubmitted once the issue is resolved.

Author: S2 is a classification level used my Mattermost for security issues.

@jupenur Do we have public documentation about our classification system?

Reviewer 6: I don't think we do, but we're also in the process of moving away from the S1/S2/S3 system to the more standard [CVSS](https://www.first.org/cvss/calculator/3.0).

An S2 would correspond to a **medium** (4.0 and above) CVSS base score. The wording should probably be changed to use the latter. We'll likely have made the transition by the time this is live, and even if we haven't, "medium severity" is easier to understand and still maps nicely back to the old system.

---
title: Community Plugins in the Marketplace
subsection: Plugins (Beta)
weight: 60
---

Once your plugin has reached a certain level of quality, you might consider submitting it to the Plugin Marketplace. The Plugin Marketplace is a platform that supports discovery, installation and updates of plugins directly within Mattermost. It's a great way to get feedback on your plugin and help make it more popular. Once your plugin is accepted to the Marketplace, Mattermost will also send you swag!

> ### Requirements for adding community plugin to the Marketplace

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Requirements for Adding A Community Plugin to the Marketplace
```

2. The plugin logs important events on appropriate log levels to allow System Admins to troubleshoot issues.

**Security Requirements (Checked by a member of the Security team)**

1. Security reviews do not reveal any exploitable vulnerabilities in the plugin.
2. The plugin provides an email address or a username on the [Community Server](https://community.mattermost.com) used to report vulnerabilities in the future.

**Functional Requirements (Checked by a QA tester)**

1. The plugin must set a `min_server_version` in the manifest.
2. The plugin must work on all Mattermost versions greater than or equal to the `min_server_version`.

Please note that Mattermost reserves the right to reject any plugin submission from the Marketplace.

As the plugin framework is currently in Beta, the rapid development cycle means that breaking changes (especially for the web app) can be expected. It's recommended that plugin authors keep up with these changes and fix bugs that may occur. Breaking changes will be mentioned in the "Important Upgrades Notes" section of the [Mattermost Changelog](https://docs.mattermost.com/administration/changelog.html).

> ### Requirements for updating a Community Plugin to the Marketplace

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Requirements for Updating a Community Plugin on the Marketplace
```

When a community plugin is updated, the new version must fulfill the following checklist to remain on the Marketplace. The new version checked by the four reviewers in the same way as when the plugin was added. The code review and security review should be performed against the `diff` of the last version in the Marketplace and the new version to be updated in the Marketplace.

The release also has to follow [Semantic Versioning](https://semver.org/). For plugins this means:

* If the plugin exposes a public API, breaking changes to the API require a major version bump.
* If an update requires manual migration actions from the administrator, a major version bump is required.

This is checked in dev review.

The new release must not change the plugin ID defined in the manifest as this would require a reconfiguration of the plugin by a System Admin.

> ### Process for adding Community Plugin to the Marketplace

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Process for Adding a Community Plugin to the Marketplace
```

5. Promotion via social media might happen on outstanding updates.

### Beta Plugins

If a community plugin doesn’t make it through the review process, it may still be added to the Marketplace and marked as “Beta”. The reviewers decide whether the quality of a plugin is sophisticated enough to be added to the Marketplace on a case-by-case basis. Security and functional reviews and items 1, 2, 3, and 5 from the [Product Requirements Checklist](#requirements-for-adding-community-plugin-to-the-marketplace) must be fulfilled for Beta plugins.

It must be made clear in the Marketplace UI that a plugin is in Beta. Beta plugins must only be visible on Mattermost servers that support labels (i.e. Mattermost v5.20 or later).

### Security Issues

Any security issues found in the plugin should be reported by email to `responsibledisclosure@mattermost.com` or sent directly to a member of the [Security team](https://developers.mattermost.com/internal/rd-teams/#security-team) on the [Community Server](https://community.mattermost.com/).

> ### Take down Policy

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Take Down Policy
```

It must be made clear in the Marketplace UI that a plugin is in beta. All beta plugins must only be visible on Mattermost Servers that support labels, which is Mattermost v5.20.

### Security Issues

> Any security issues found in the plugin have to be emailed to `responsibledisclosure@mattermost.com` or send to a member of the security team on the [Community Server](https://community.mattermost.com/).

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
Any security issues found in the plugin should be reported by email to `responsibledisclosure@mattermost.com` or sent directly to a member of the [security team](https://developers.mattermost.com/internal/rd-teams/#security-team) on the [Community Server](https://community.mattermost.com/).
```
Minor wording change + link to security team members' names
